sql/wms/README.md, before:


# Configure Notes WMS

Notes WMS is a layer service that locates the open and closed notes on a map.
This layer can be included in JOSM or Vespucci to easily locate notes, and
process them by location.
By having the location of notes from a wide perspective, one can zoom in on
the areas where the notes are still open.
This service does not provide a lot of zoom detail, because it is only
necessary to have a rough idea of where open notes are located.

As part of the service, it also locates closed notes.
This allows us to identify areas where many notes have been opened, and imagine
the reason why.

This service uses the OSM Notes ingestion system, which maintains an updated set
of notes (open and closed).
To make WMS work some changes on the database are necessary, to copy just
the necessary values into another table, with the geometry already created.
This speeds up the queries for the WMS, without impacting the notes base table.

Then, it is necessary to configure GeoServer (which only needs to be downloaded)
and the basic configuration is explained here.

The layer is configured with a style (SLD file) that changes the color of the
note according to its age.
When open notes, the older the darker the note, meaning it has less value than
recently open notes.
When closed notes, the lighter the older, meaning it was processed long before.

## Installation

### Schema Verification (Recommended First Step)

Before installing WMS components, verify that your database schema matches the expected schema from OSM-Notes-Ingestion:

```bash
# Verify database schema compatibility
psql -d notes -f sql/wms/verifySchema.sql
```

This script checks:
- PostGIS extension installation
- Required columns in `notes` table
- Existence of `countries` table
- Data availability

If verification fails, ensure you have the correct version of OSM-Notes-Ingestion installed and that the database has been properly populated.

### Automated Installation (Recommended)

Use the WMS manager script for easy installation and management:

```bash

# Install WMS components
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh install

# Check installation status
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh status

# Remove WMS components
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh remove

# Show help
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh help
```

The WMS manager script includes:

- ✅ Automatic validation of prerequisites (PostgreSQL, PostGIS)
- ✅ Database connection testing
- ✅ Installation status checking
- ✅ Safe installation with conflict detection
- ✅ Force reinstallation option
- ✅ Dry-run mode for testing
- ✅ Comprehensive error handling

### Manual Installation

For manual installation, follow these steps:

## Database configuration

- Provide a password to the database user.

```text
ALTER USER myuser WITH PASSWORD 'mypassword';
```

- Change the database configuration to allow remote connections.
This link could be useful:
<https://www.bigbinary.com/blog/configure-postgresql-to-allow-remote-connection>
Also, you can find the configuration file with this:

```text
find / -name "postgresql.conf" 2> /dev/null
```

And modify the file to make Postgres listen from any address:

```text
vi /etc/postgresql/14/main/postgresql.conf

listen_addresses = '*'
```

Restart the service:

```text
sudo systemctl restart postgresql.service
```

Allow users to connect remotely:

```text
find / -name "pg_hba.conf" 2> /dev/null
vi /etc/postgresql/14/main/pg_hba.conf
host    all             all              0.0.0.0/0                       md5
host    all             all              ::/0                            md5
```

- Execute the necessary SQLs to adapt the database to synchronize with this
service.
Let's suppose the Postgres database is called `notes`.

```text
psql -d "notes" -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -f "prepareDatabase.sql"
```

## Geoserver configuration

Configure the GeoServer to publish the layer from the database, following
these instructions.

### Contact Information

#### Organization

- Organization: OSM LatAm
- Online Resource: <https://osmlatam.org>
- Welcome: Set of layers provided by OpenStreetMap LatAm.

#### Primary Contact

- Contact: Andres Gomez Casanova - AngocA
- Position: Volunteer
- Email: angoca @ osm.lat

#### Address

- City: Bogota
- State: D.C.
- Country: Colombia

### Workspaces

- Name: OSM_Notes
- Namespace URI: OSM_Notes

### Stores

#### Basic Store Info

PostGIS

- Workspace: OSM_Notes
- Data Source Name: OSM Notes DS
- Description: Data for OSM Notes

#### Connection Parameters

- Host:
- Port:
- Database: notes
- User:
- Passwd:

### Styles

#### Syle Data

SLD files are under the `sld` directory.

- Name: Open notes style
- Workspace: OSM_Notes
- Upload a style line
  - Choose File: OpenNotes.sld
  - Upload...
- Legend: Add legend

- Name: Closed notes style
- Workspace: OSM_Notes
- Upload a style line
  - Choose File: ClosedNotes.sld
  - Upload...
- Legend: Add legend

### Layers

__Open Notes__

__On Data tab:__

Add layer from OSM_Notes:OSM_Notes_DS.

Configure new SQL view...

- View Name: Open OSM Notes layer
- SQL Statement:

```text
SELECT /* Notes-WMS */ 
  year_created_at, 
  year_closed_at, 
  id_country,
  country_shape_mod,
  geometry
FROM wms.notes_wms
WHERE year_closed_at IS NULL
ORDER BY year_created_at DESC
```

### Styles

For each layer.

#### Publishing

- Default

#### Basic Resource Info

- Abstract: This layer shows the location of the currently open notes.
The color intensity shows the age of the creation time.

#### Coordinate Reference Systems

- Declared SRS: EPSG:4326

#### Bounding Boxes

- Compute from SRS bounds
- Compute from native bounds

__On the Publishing tab:__

#### WMS Settings - Layers Settings

- Additional Styles: OSM_Notes:OpenNotes

#### WMS Attribution

- Attribution Text: OpenStreetMap contributors
- Attribution Link: <https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright>

__On the Tile Caching tab:__

#### Tile cache configuration

- Uncheck image/jpeg
- (Optional) Put 3600 for Expire Server cache after n seconds.
- Styles: Default Style: OSM_Notes:ClosedNotes (and check it).
- Gridset:
  - Published zoom levels: 0 - 8

__Closed Notes__

__On the Data tab:__

Layer from OSM_Notes:OSM_Notes_DS.

- View Name: Closed OSM Notes layer
- SQL Statement:

```text
SELECT /* Notes-WMS */ 
  year_created_at, 
  year_closed_at, 
  id_country,
  country_shape_mod,
  geometry
FROM wms.notes_wms
WHERE year_closed_at IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY year_created_at DESC
```

#### Basic Resource Info

- Abstract: This layer shows the location of the closed notes.
The color intensity shows the age of the creation time.

__On the Publishing tab:__

#### WMS Settings - Layers Settings

- Additional Styles: OSM_Notes:CloseNotes

The other options the same as for open notes.

__Disputed and Unclaimed Areas__

This layer uses a __materialized view__ because the query is computationally
expensive (ST_Union over all countries, ST_Difference operations). The view is
automatically refreshed when `updateCountries.sh` runs (typically monthly).

To manually refresh the view:

```bash
psql -d notes -f sql/wms/refreshDisputedAreasView.sql
```

Or using SQL:

```sql
REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW CONCURRENTLY wms.disputed_and_unclaimed_areas;
```

__On the Data tab:__

Layer from OSM_Notes:OSM_Notes_DS.

- View Name: Disputed and Unclaimed Areas layer
- SQL Statement:

```text
SELECT /* Disputed-WMS */ id, geometry, zone_type, country_ids, country_names
FROM wms.disputed_and_unclaimed_areas
ORDER BY zone_type, id
```

- Geometry Column: `geometry`
- SRID: `4326`

#### Basic Resource Info

- Abstract: This layer shows disputed areas (overlapping countries) and
  unclaimed areas (gaps between countries). The view is automatically refreshed
  monthly when country boundaries are updated.

__On the Publishing tab:__

#### WMS Settings - Layers Settings

- Additional Styles: OSM_Notes:DisputedAndUnclaimedAreas

The other options the same as for open notes.

__Note__: Disputed areas are shown in red, unclaimed areas in yellow. Maritime
zones are excluded from unclaimed areas calculation as they are intentionally
not claimed (international waters).

### Disk Quota

- Enable disk quota
- Maximum tile cache size: 5 GB

### BlobStores

- Add new:
- Type of BlobStore: File BlobStore
- Identifier: OSM Notes
- Enabled.
- Default.
- Base Directory: A location with more than 50 GB space.

### Tile Layers

- Choose each layer, and click on Seed/Truncate.

### Passwords

- Change active master provider.

### Users, Groups, Roles

- Change admin password.

### Additionally

- Activate BlobStores.

## Files

Under `sld`:

- `ClosedNotes.sld` QGIS generated file for WMS style on closed notes.
- `CountriesAndMaritimes.sld` QGIS generated file for WMS style on countries
  and maritimes areas.
- `DisputedAndUnclaimedAreas.sld` SLD file for WMS style on disputed and
  unclaimed areas (red for disputed, yellow for unclaimed)
- `refreshDisputedAreasView.sql` SQL script to refresh the materialized view
  (automatically called by `updateCountries.sh`)
- `OpenNotes.sld` QGIS generated file for WMS style on open notes.

Under `sql/wms`

- `verifySchema.sql` SQL script to verify that the database schema matches
  the expected schema from OSM-Notes-Ingestion. Run this before installation
  to ensure compatibility. See [Schema Verification](#schema-verification-recommended-first-step) above.
- `prepareDatabase.sql` All the necessary scripts to synchronize the OSM
  Notes ingestion system with this Notes WMS layer service. This includes
  creating the `wms.notes_wms` table and the `wms.disputed_and_unclaimed_areas`
  materialized view.
- `refreshDisputedAreasView.sql` SQL script to refresh the materialized view
  for disputed and unclaimed areas (automatically called by `updateCountries.sh`).
- `removeFromDatabase.sql` Removes the Notes WMS part from the database.
- `grantGeoserverPermissions.sql` Grants read-only permissions to the `geoserver`
  user for accessing WMS data.

Commit message:

Update SQL scripts to refine country shape assignment and exclude maritime zones from disputed area calculations
- Modified the modulo operation for `id_country` from 6 to 12 in `prepareDatabase.sql` to accommodate new shape assignments.
- Enhanced comments and documentation to clarify the exclusion of maritime zones from disputed and unclaimed area calculations, ensuring accurate representation in the database.
- Added integration tests to verify that maritime zones are correctly excluded from disputed area calculations.

sql/wms/README.md, after:


# Configure Notes WMS

Notes WMS is a layer service that locates the open and closed notes on a map.
This layer can be included in JOSM or Vespucci to easily locate notes, and
process them by location.
By having the location of notes from a wide perspective, one can zoom in on
the areas where the notes are still open.
This service does not provide a lot of zoom detail, because it is only
necessary to have a rough idea of where open notes are located.

As part of the service, it also locates closed notes.
This allows us to identify areas where many notes have been opened, and imagine
the reason why.

This service uses the OSM Notes ingestion system, which maintains an updated set
of notes (open and closed).
To make WMS work some changes on the database are necessary, to copy just
the necessary values into another table, with the geometry already created.
This speeds up the queries for the WMS, without impacting the notes base table.

Then, it is necessary to configure GeoServer (which only needs to be downloaded)
and the basic configuration is explained here.

The layer is configured with a style (SLD file) that changes the color of the
note according to its age.
When open notes, the older the darker the note, meaning it has less value than
recently open notes.
When closed notes, the lighter the older, meaning it was processed long before.

## Installation

### Schema Verification (Recommended First Step)

Before installing WMS components, verify that your database schema matches the expected schema from OSM-Notes-Ingestion:

```bash
# Verify database schema compatibility
psql -d notes -f sql/wms/verifySchema.sql
```

This script checks:
- PostGIS extension installation
- Required columns in `notes` table
- Existence of `countries` table
- Data availability

If verification fails, ensure you have the correct version of OSM-Notes-Ingestion installed and that the database has been properly populated.

### Automated Installation (Recommended)

Use the WMS manager script for easy installation and management:

```bash

# Install WMS components
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh install

# Check installation status
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh status

# Remove WMS components
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh remove

# Show help
./bin/wms/wmsManager.sh help
```

The WMS manager script includes:

- ✅ Automatic validation of prerequisites (PostgreSQL, PostGIS)
- ✅ Database connection testing
- ✅ Installation status checking
- ✅ Safe installation with conflict detection
- ✅ Force reinstallation option
- ✅ Dry-run mode for testing
- ✅ Comprehensive error handling

### Manual Installation

For manual installation, follow these steps:

## Database configuration

- Provide a password to the database user.

```text
ALTER USER myuser WITH PASSWORD 'mypassword';
```

- Change the database configuration to allow remote connections.
This link could be useful:
<https://www.bigbinary.com/blog/configure-postgresql-to-allow-remote-connection>
Also, you can find the configuration file with this:

```text
find / -name "postgresql.conf" 2> /dev/null
```

And modify the file to make Postgres listen from any address:

```text
vi /etc/postgresql/14/main/postgresql.conf

listen_addresses = '*'
```

Restart the service:

```text
sudo systemctl restart postgresql.service
```

Allow users to connect remotely:

```text
find / -name "pg_hba.conf" 2> /dev/null
vi /etc/postgresql/14/main/pg_hba.conf
host    all             all              0.0.0.0/0                       md5
host    all             all              ::/0                            md5
```

- Execute the necessary SQLs to adapt the database to synchronize with this
service.
Let's suppose the Postgres database is called `notes`.

```text
psql -d "notes" -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -f "prepareDatabase.sql"
```

## Geoserver configuration

Configure the GeoServer to publish the layer from the database, following
these instructions.

### Contact Information

#### Organization

- Organization: OSM LatAm
- Online Resource: <https://osmlatam.org>
- Welcome: Set of layers provided by OpenStreetMap LatAm.

#### Primary Contact

- Contact: Andres Gomez Casanova - AngocA
- Position: Volunteer
- Email: angoca @ osm.lat

#### Address

- City: Bogota
- State: D.C.
- Country: Colombia

### Workspaces

- Name: OSM_Notes
- Namespace URI: OSM_Notes

### Stores

#### Basic Store Info

PostGIS

- Workspace: OSM_Notes
- Data Source Name: OSM Notes DS
- Description: Data for OSM Notes

#### Connection Parameters

- Host:
- Port:
- Database: notes
- User:
- Passwd:

### Styles

#### Syle Data

SLD files are under the `sld` directory.

- Name: Open notes style
- Workspace: OSM_Notes
- Upload a style line
  - Choose File: OpenNotes.sld
  - Upload...
- Legend: Add legend

- Name: Closed notes style
- Workspace: OSM_Notes
- Upload a style line
  - Choose File: ClosedNotes.sld
  - Upload...
- Legend: Add legend

### Layers

__Open Notes__

__On Data tab:__

Add layer from OSM_Notes:OSM_Notes_DS.

Configure new SQL view...

- View Name: Open OSM Notes layer
- SQL Statement:

```text
SELECT /* Notes-WMS */ 
  year_created_at, 
  year_closed_at, 
  id_country,
  country_shape_mod,
  geometry
FROM wms.notes_wms
WHERE year_closed_at IS NULL
ORDER BY year_created_at DESC
```

### Styles

For each layer.

#### Publishing

- Default

#### Basic Resource Info

- Abstract: This layer shows the location of the currently open notes.
The color intensity shows the age of the creation time.

#### Coordinate Reference Systems

- Declared SRS: EPSG:4326

#### Bounding Boxes

- Compute from SRS bounds
- Compute from native bounds

__On the Publishing tab:__

#### WMS Settings - Layers Settings

- Additional Styles: OSM_Notes:OpenNotes

#### WMS Attribution

- Attribution Text: OpenStreetMap contributors
- Attribution Link: <https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright>

__On the Tile Caching tab:__

#### Tile cache configuration

- Uncheck image/jpeg
- (Optional) Put 3600 for Expire Server cache after n seconds.
- Styles: Default Style: OSM_Notes:ClosedNotes (and check it).
- Gridset:
  - Published zoom levels: 0 - 8

__Closed Notes__

__On the Data tab:__

Layer from OSM_Notes:OSM_Notes_DS.

- View Name: Closed OSM Notes layer
- SQL Statement:

```text
SELECT /* Notes-WMS */ 
  year_created_at, 
  year_closed_at, 
  id_country,
  country_shape_mod,
  geometry
FROM wms.notes_wms
WHERE year_closed_at IS NOT NULL
ORDER BY year_created_at DESC
```

#### Basic Resource Info

- Abstract: This layer shows the location of the closed notes.
The color intensity shows the age of the creation time.

__On the Publishing tab:__

#### WMS Settings - Layers Settings

- Additional Styles: OSM_Notes:CloseNotes

The other options the same as for open notes.

__Disputed and Unclaimed Areas__

This layer uses a __materialized view__ because the query is computationally
expensive (ST_Union over all countries, ST_Difference operations). The view is
automatically refreshed when `updateCountries.sh` runs (typically monthly).

To manually refresh the view:

```bash
psql -d notes -f sql/wms/refreshDisputedAreasView.sql
```

Or using SQL:

```sql
REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW CONCURRENTLY wms.disputed_and_unclaimed_areas;
```

__On the Data tab:__

Layer from OSM_Notes:OSM_Notes_DS.

- View Name: Disputed and Unclaimed Areas layer
- SQL Statement:

```text
SELECT /* Disputed-WMS */ id, geometry, zone_type, country_ids, country_names
FROM wms.disputed_and_unclaimed_areas
ORDER BY zone_type, id
```

- Geometry Column: `geometry`
- SRID: `4326`

#### Basic Resource Info

- Abstract: This layer shows disputed areas (overlapping countries) and
  unclaimed areas (gaps between countries). The view is automatically refreshed
  monthly when country boundaries are updated.

__On the Publishing tab:__

#### WMS Settings - Layers Settings

- Additional Styles: OSM_Notes:DisputedAndUnclaimedAreas

The other options the same as for open notes.

__Note__: Disputed areas are shown in red, unclaimed areas in yellow. Maritime
zones (those with parentheses in name, e.g., "Colombia (200nm EEZ)") are excluded
from both disputed and unclaimed areas calculation, as they can legitimately overlap
with countries and each other (EEZ zones) and are intentionally not claimed
(international waters).

### Disk Quota

- Enable disk quota
- Maximum tile cache size: 5 GB

### BlobStores

- Add new:
- Type of BlobStore: File BlobStore
- Identifier: OSM Notes
- Enabled.
- Default.
- Base Directory: A location with more than 50 GB space.

### Tile Layers

- Choose each layer, and click on Seed/Truncate.

### Passwords

- Change active master provider.

### Users, Groups, Roles

- Change admin password.

### Additionally

- Activate BlobStores.

## Files

Under `sld`:

- `ClosedNotes.sld` QGIS generated file for WMS style on closed notes.
- `CountriesAndMaritimes.sld` QGIS generated file for WMS style on countries
  and maritimes areas.
- `DisputedAndUnclaimedAreas.sld` SLD file for WMS style on disputed and
  unclaimed areas (red for disputed, yellow for unclaimed)
- `refreshDisputedAreasView.sql` SQL script to refresh the materialized view
  (automatically called by `updateCountries.sh`)
- `OpenNotes.sld` QGIS generated file for WMS style on open notes.

Under `sql/wms`

- `verifySchema.sql` SQL script to verify that the database schema matches
  the expected schema from OSM-Notes-Ingestion. Run this before installation
  to ensure compatibility. See [Schema Verification](#schema-verification-recommended-first-step) above.
- `prepareDatabase.sql` All the necessary scripts to synchronize the OSM
  Notes ingestion system with this Notes WMS layer service. This includes
  creating the `wms.notes_wms` table and the `wms.disputed_and_unclaimed_areas`
  materialized view.
- `refreshDisputedAreasView.sql` SQL script to refresh the materialized view
  for disputed and unclaimed areas (automatically called by `updateCountries.sh`).
- `removeFromDatabase.sql` Removes the Notes WMS part from the database.
- `grantGeoserverPermissions.sql` Grants read-only permissions to the `geoserver`
  user for accessing WMS data.
